---
layout: post
author: Courtney McBeth
categories: ['Website']
logo: markdown_logo.png
title: Creating a Guide
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{site.baseurl}}/css/code_styles/googlecode.css">
<script src="{{site.baseurl}}/js/highlight.pack.js"></script>
<script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();</script>

GitHub Pages sites run on [Jekyll](https://jekyllrb.com/), a static site generater that allows us to use Markdown instead of (or in addition to) HTML. Your guide will live in a Markdown file in the *_posts* directory of the intrasite repository (in the *gh-pages* branch). Here, create a file in the following format: __YYYY-MM-DD-title.md__. At the top of the file, the [front matter](https://jekyllrb.com/docs/front-matter/) must be included. This is metadata that specifies the layout, author, and title of the post, as well as the category that the guide falls into and the logo that the site will use when creating a link to the guide. If you can't find a nice looking image to use as the logo, use _default.svg_. The front matter is delimited by three dashes (no spaces between them) on the top and bottom. As an example, the front matter for this guide is as follows:

<pre>
<code class="markdown">
---
layout: post
author: Courtney McBeth
categories: ['Website']
logo: markdown&#95;logo.png
title: Creating a Guide
---
</code>
</pre>

You can also reference the other posts in this directory for examples. Note that the logo must be a file in the *images* directory. Below the front matter, you can begin your main content. For examples, see the other posts and the [Markdown Cheatsheet](https://github.com/adam-p/markdown-here/wiki/Markdown-Cheatsheet). To publish your guide, simply push your changes to the *gh-pages* branch! One point of note is how to include blocks of code. Markdown supports code blocks, but a better solution is to use a JavaScript library. I have setup [highlight.js](https://highlightjs.org/) for use on our site. To include a code block, follow these steps:

First, you must include the following three lines of html (exactly as they appear) underneath the front matter of your Markdown file.

{% raw %}
<pre>
<code class="html">
&lt;link rel="stylesheet" href="{{site.baseurl}}/css/code_styles/googlecode.css"&gt;
&lt;script src="{{site.baseurl}}/js/highlight.pack.js">&lt;/script&gt;
&lt;script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();&lt;/script&gt;
</code>
</pre>
{% endraw %}

Now, wherever you want your code block to appear, include something like this:
<pre>
<code class="html">
&lt;pre&gt;
&lt;code class="some_language_here"&gt;
&lt;!-- your code here --&gt;
&lt;/code&gt;
&lt;/pre&gt;
</code>
</pre>

Replace the class name *some_language_here* with the name of the language you are using (something like "python", "shell", or "html").