---
layout: post
author: Courtney McBeth
categories: ['Setting up for a New Year']
logo: github-logo.png
title: Creating a New Progress Page
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{site.baseurl}}/css/code_styles/dracula.css">
<script src="{{site.baseurl}}/js/highlight.pack.js"></script>
<script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();</script>

I implemented the progress page/goal tracker because I noticed that I had a hard time keeping track of where other groups were at in their projects. It's meant to make life easier for everyone, but if it ends up being more of a nuisance, then the new lead should feel free to stop using it, this is simply what works best for me. So, if you feel as though you would benefit from using it again, here's how you would set it up.

## How to Archive the Progress Page

If you want to get rid of the progress tracker altogether, you can delete this line from *_includes/navbar.html*:

<pre>
<code class="html">
&lt;li&gt;&lt;a href="{{ site.baseurl }}/progress_gateway.html"&gt;Progress&lt;/a&gt;&lt;/li&gt;
</code>
</pre>

(or if you'd like to use the progress tracker, but previously it was removed, put this line back in).

## A Little Bit about Oauth Apps

The progress page uses the GitHub Issues API. A _goal_ is really an _issue_ as seen by GitHub. This is why you can see all of the goals if you look at the issues tab of the intrasite repository. In order to create an issue, a user must be logged into and authenticated by GitHub. The intrasite is registered as an oauth app by the CUSail Navigation Team GitHub organization, which allows it to access a user's account when they access the progress tracker page. All of this is meant to explain why the *progress_gateway.html* page is necessary. This redirects to the GitHub login page, which then redirects (after login is complete) to the *get_acc_code.html* page. This page gets an access token for the authenticated user, which is used when creating issues. This is what the *auth* parameter is in the url for the progress page. Note that this is definitely not ideal and that secure information like access tokens shouldn't generally be exposed like that, but since GitHub Pages sites are static and don't allow cookies, this is basically our only option.

## Create the HTML File

Duplicate the *progress2020-2021.html* file (or another year if this gets done again) and rename it with the relevant years. Update the _title_ parameter in the front matter. Now, go to *js/auth.js* and update line 30 with the name of the file that you just created:

<pre>
<code class="javascript">
var redir = 'https://cusail-navigation.github.io/intrasite/progress2020-2021';
</code>
</pre>

## Create Milestones

Go to the [milestones](https://github.com/CUSail-Navigation/intrasite/milestones) page of the intrasite repository. Here, create a milestone for each month you want to track (it doesn't have to be months, you could use whatever time scale you want). Each _goal_ is associated with a milestone. Go back to the HTML file that you created and note these lines:

<pre>
<code class="javascript">
// must be hardcoded, check https://api.github.com/repos/cusail-navigation/intrasite/milestones
// to get the milestone titles and numbers that you want
var milestone_str = ['August 2020', 'September 2020', 'October 2020', 'November 2020', 'December 2020', 'January 2021', 'February 2021', 'March 2021', 'April 2021', 'May 2021'];
var milestone_num = ["1", "2", "3", "4", "5", "6", "7", "8", "9", "10"];
</code>
</pre>

You'll need to update these arrays to use the milestones that you've created (note that the numbers need to be inputted as strings). If you use the GET request I've commented on above (https://api.github.com/repos/cusail-navigation/intrasite/milestones), you'll be given information about every existing milestone. Sift through these and find the numbers associated with your new milestones.

## Update Competition Date

Finally, update the competition date in your new HTML file as well. It should be in MM/DD/YYYY format.

<pre>
<code class="javascript">
// competition date (for the date tracker at the top of the page)
var compDate = new Date("06/01/2021");
</code>
</pre>

After you've pushed these changes, your progress page should show up when you click on _Progress_ in the navigation bar.