---
layout: post
author: Courtney McBeth
categories: ['Raspberry Pi Setup']
logo: vnc_logo.png
title: Raspberry Pi Headless Setup
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{site.baseurl}}/css/code_styles/googlecode.css">
<script src="{{site.baseurl}}/js/highlight.pack.js"></script>
<script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();</script>

## Install Raspberry Pi OS on an SD Card

A micro SD card must be used as the main memory for the Raspberry Pi. Typically, 16 GB is sufficient. Before it can be used, the SD card must be formatted and flashed with the Raspberry Pi OS. This can be done using the [Raspberry Pi Imager](https://www.raspberrypi.org/downloads/). Insert the SD card into your computer. If it has already been used to store files, these will need to be deleted so that its memory is empty. Open the application and select the recommended Raspberry Pi OS as the operating system. Choose your SD card and select _write_. Now, we'll need to configure some settings so that we can connect to the Raspberry Pi.

## Configure the Raspberry Pi for Headless Operation

Unlike an Arduino, a Raspberry Pi is a single board computer. This means that it's more like a desktop with a monitor, mouse, and keyboard than a microcontroller. Obviously, we want to be able to use the Raspberry Pi without all of these extra peripheral devices. To do this we are going to configure it for SSH, which, simply put, allows us to connect to another computer over Wi-Fi.

Make sure that the SD card is inserted into your computer (it should now be named _boot_). Add a file to the SD card named _ssh_ (make sure there is no file extention - .txt or anything like that). This file should not contain anything, it just tells the Raspberry Pi to enable SSH.

Add another file to the SD card, called __wpa_supplicant.conf__. This one should contain the following (replace the SSID and password):

<pre>
<code class="plaintext">
ctrl_interface=DIR=/var/run/wpa_supplicant GROUP=netdev
update_config=1
country=US

network={
 ssid="<Name of your wireless LAN>"
 psk="<Password for your wireless LAN>"
}
</code>
</pre>

Note (7/19/20): this only works for WPA/WPA 2 networks. For WPA/WPA 2 Enterprise networks, like Cornell's Wi-Fi, [this solution](https://gist.github.com/elec3647/1e223c02ef2a9a3f836db7984011b53b) may work. I'll look into it.

Now, eject the SD card and plug it into the Raspberry Pi.

## Connect to the Raspberry Pi

Power on the Raspberry Pi and make sure that your computer is connected to the same network as the Raspberry Pi. Open your terminal (or command prompt) and enter:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
ssh pi@raspberrypi.local
</code>
</pre>

It will ask you for a password. The default is _raspberry_, but we will change this later.

Since this is the first time we're starting up the Raspberry Pi, let's look for software updates. Run these commands (they may take a while to execute):

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo apt-get update
</code>
</pre>

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo apt-get upgrade
</code>
</pre>

After an upgrade, it's a good idea to reboot. Run the following to restart the Raspberry Pi:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo reboot
</code>
</pre>

This will disconnect you from the Raspberry Pi. Give it a minute to reboot, reconnect via SSH, and reenter the password.

## Change the Username and Password

The default username and password for the Raspberry Pi are incredibly guessable, so let's change them. Connected over SSH, let's create a new user (replace _username_ with your new username):

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo adduser username
</code>
</pre>

When prompted, enter a memorable password. You'll be prompted for some information about the new user, you can leave these blank. Now, we'll need to give this new user sudo permissions. Run this command:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo visudo
</code>
</pre>

This will open a text editor in the command line. Use the arrow keys to scroll down to this section:

<pre>
<code class="plaintext">
# User privilege specification
pi    ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL
</code>
</pre>

Add a new line to give the new user all privileges:

<pre>
<code class="plaintext">
# User privilege specification
pi                ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL
new_username_here ALL=(ALL:ALL) ALL
</code>
</pre>

Exit the editor using ^X. Now logout, which will disconnect the SSH connection, and login as the new user:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
logout
</code>
</pre>

<pre>
<code class="shell">
ssh new_username_here@raspberrypi.local
</code>
</pre>

## Setup VNC Viewer

SSH is a good tool if we're okay with typing all of our code in the command line or using scp to transfer all of our files from our computers to the Raspberry Pi. Fortunately, we have other options. We can use VNC (Virtual Network Computing) to view the Raspberry Pi's GUI on our computers. Install the necessary packages on the Raspberry Pi over SSH using the following command:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
sudo apt-get install tightvncserver
</code>
</pre>

Install [Real VNC](https://www.realvnc.com/en/connect/download/viewer/) on your computer and open it up.

Now, start VNC on the Raspberry Pi over SSH using the following command:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
tightvncserver
</code>
</pre>

The first time you do this, it will require you to setup a password to connect to the Raspberry Pi, make sure to write it down somewhere. Now, you should see something like this:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
New 'X' desktop is raspberrypi:1
</code>
</pre>

This tells you the _instance_ of raspberrypi that you'll need to connect to. Here, as given by _raspberrypi:1_, the instance is _1_. In Real VNC, enter the address of the Raspberry Pi in the text box at the top of the window. In this case, the address is _raspberrypi.local:1_, but if you were given a different instance number, enter that instead of _1_. Enter the password that you created when you are prompted. Now, you'll see the Raspberry Pi's GUI, which you can use to control the Raspberry Pi.

## Change the Hostname

The default hostname of any Raspberry Pi is _raspberrypi_, so if you have multiple Raspberry Pis, you may run into namespace errors when trying to SSH. To avoid this, let's make sure that each Raspberry Pi on our network has it's own unique hostname. There is a way to do this over the command line, but you would get disconnected and have to reconnect multiple times, so we'll use VNC. While connected to the Raspberry Pi over VNC, open the Raspberry Pi toolbar menu and go to Preferences -> Raspberry Pi Configuration (this may require you to enter the password). Change the hostname to something memorable. Next, reboot the Raspberry Pi. VNC and SSH will be disconnected. Reconnect over SSH and VNC while changing the previous hostname, _raspberrypi_ to your new hostname. The new SSH command will be:

<pre>
<code class="shell">
ssh pi@new_hostname_here.local
</code>
</pre>

And the new connection name for VNC will be something like __new_hostname_here.local:1__ (again change _1_ to whatever instance you're given if it differs).

Now, your Raspberry Pi is ready to use!