---
layout: post
author: Courtney McBeth
categories: ['Navigation Algorithm']
logo: algo_logo.png
title: Running the Algorithm
---

<link rel="stylesheet" href="{{site.baseurl}}/css/code_styles/hybrid.css">
<script src="{{site.baseurl}}/js/highlight.pack.js"></script>
<script>hljs.initHighlightingOnLoad();</script>

## Configuring the Algorithm

The file _nav\_algo/\_\_main\_\_.py_ contains information about the event algorithm being run as well as the waypoints that should be reached. The waypoints should be set as a list of _(latitude, longitude)_ pairs (one pair per waypoint). This, along with the event parameter will be passed into the call to _nav.NavigationController()_. An example of what this call should look like is shown below.

**Future Work:** It would be useful to implement a function that reads the waypoints from a file. This would allow for easy switching between different regatta courses and reusability.

<pre>
<code class="python">
import nav_algo.navigation as nav
import nav_algo.events as events


def main():
    # waypoints is an array of (lat, long) tuples
    waypoints = [(42.04690135,-76.5024614),(42.4688799,-76.5028114)]

    nav_controller = nav.NavigationController(waypoints=waypoints, event=events.FLEET_RACE)


if __name__ == "__main__":
    main()

</code>
</pre>

The options for the event parameter are:

<pre>
<code class="python">
events.ENDURANCE
events.STATION_KEEPING
events.PRECISION_NAVIGATION
events.COLLISION_AVOIDANCE
events.SEARCH
events.FLEET_RACE
None

</code>
</pre>

The default is fleet race, which only allows manual control of the boat. To just run the navigation algorithm without an event, use _None_ as the event parameter.

## Starting the Algorithm

The navigation algorithm is implemented as a Python module. This is why imports must be done with _dot notation_ rather than as files. It also requires us to use the _-m_ option when running the terminal command to start the algorithm. The following command can be used to run the algorithm.

<pre>
<code class="shell">
python3 -m nav_algo

</code>
</pre>

## Using the GUI

## Manual Control over UART